# Document: ddf5bf3f-bdce-4c5f-adbe-d8cef8d80992_1.pdf

## Page 1

An Introduction to the Brain and Nervous System 1-1
OverviewModule 1— An Introduction to the Brain and Nervous System
                                                                                                                             
Summary
This introductory module of the Brain Power! Challenge Program is designed to help students learn about 
the parts of the brain, the functions of these parts, and how the brain communicates with the rest of the 
body. The process of neurotransmission is described in detail. This module provides a key foundation for the 
next five modules, which will discuss the impact of specific drugs on the body and the brain.
Learning Objectives
At the end of this module: 
• Students can name the main parts of the brain: the cerebral cortex, hypothalamus, cerebellum, 
brain stem, and limbic system.
• Students can identify the lobes of the cerebral cortex: frontal, parietal, occipital, and temporal. 
• Students can explain the functions of the major brain parts.
• Students can identify the components of a neuron: cell body, dendrites, and axon. 
• Students can explain the process of neurotransmission.
MAJOR PARTS OF THE BRAIN  
Cerebral Cortex
The cerebral cortex is the largest part of the human brain, making up more than 75 percent of this organ. 
The cerebral cortex is also the most highly developed part of the brain. It controls thinking, perception,  
and understanding language.
The cerebral cortex is divided into two hemispheres–the right hemisphere and the left hemisphere.
• The right hemisphere controls the left side of the body and is largely responsible for artistic 
expression and for understanding relationships in space–tasks such as reading a map. 
OverviewOverview
Background
Students will refer to the information covered in this introductory module throughout the 
entire Brain Power!  c u r r i c u l u m .  I f  t h e  s t u d e n t s  d i d  n o t  p a r t i c i p a t e  i n  t h e  Brain Power! The 
NIDA Junior Scientists  Program for grades K −5, the information in this module may need to be 
covered in greater depth.

## Page 2

Module 11-2
•   The left hemisphere controls the right side of the body. It is largely responsible for mathematical     
 ability, problem solving, and comparing information needed to make decisions. It is also the  
  brain’s language center.
The two hemispheres communicate with one another through a bundle of fibers called the corpus 
callosum. The corpus callosum is the bridge between the two hemispheres. 
The cortex is specialized. Four speci fic areas of the cortex, called lobes, are responsible for di fferent 
tasks:
• T h e  frontal lobe  is responsible for initiating and coordinating motor movements and higher 
cognitive skills, such as problem solving and thinking.
• The parietal lobe  processes sensory information from the whole body–for example, information  
about pain, touch, and pressure.
• The occipital lobe  processes visual information coming into the brain.
•  The temporal lobe is in charge of making sense of the auditory information from the environment. 
Background

## Page 3

An Introduction to the Brain and Nervous System 1-3
Hypothalamus 
The hypothalamus  is situated deep inside the center of the brain. The hypothalamus links the nervous 
system to the endocrine system by producing and releasing hormones. The endocrine system is made 
up of glands that regulate, coordinate, and control hormones. The hypothalamus regulates body 
temperature, hunger, and thirst.
Cerebellum
The cerebellum  is located at the back of the head near the spine. It controls posture, movement, and 
the sense of balance. Playing ball, picking up objects, and playing musical instruments are among the 
activities that fall under the control of the cerebellum.
Brain Stem
The brain stem , the most primitive part of the brain, connects the brain to the spinal cord. It is located 
near the cerebellum. The two main parts of the brain stem are the pons and the medulla . The pons 
contains nerve fibers that connect the cerebral cortex with the cerebellum and the spinal cord. The 
pons controls sleep, awakening, and dream onset. The medulla controls heart rate, respiration, and 
blood pressure. The brain stem also controls simple re flexes, such as coughing and sneezing.
Limbic System
The limbic system  is located deep inside the brain. It has many parts, but two of the most important 
are the hippocampus  and the amygdala. The hippocampus is mainly responsible for learning and 
memory. The amygdala plays an important role in emotional behavior. The limbic system is greatly 
affected by substances such as nicotine, alcohol, and illegal drugs.
Background

## Page 4

Module 11-4
NEURONS
Information is constantly exchanged between the 
brain and other parts of the body by both electrical 
and chemical impulses. Cells called neurons are 
responsible for carrying this information. All of the 
major brain parts discussed above are composed 
of neurons—almost 100 billion neurons total!
A neuron has three main parts. The cell body  
directs all the neuron’s activities. Dendrites,  short 
branches that extend out from the cell body, 
receive messages from other neurons and pass 
them on to the cell body. An axon is a long fiber 
that transmits messages from the cell body to the 
dendrites of other neurons or to other tissues in 
the body, such as muscles. A protective covering, 
called the myelin sheath,  covers the axons of 
many neurons. Myelin insulates the axons and 
helps messages from nerve signals travel faster, 
farther, and more e fficiently.
NEUROTRANSMISSION
The exchange of information between 
the axon of one neuron and the 
dendrites of another neuron is called 
neurotransmission. Neurotransmission 
takes place through the release of 
chemicals into the space between 
the axon of the first neuron and the 
dendrites of the second neuron. These 
chemicals are called neurotransmitters. 
The space between the axon and the 
dendrite is called a synapse.
Background

## Page 5

An Introduction to the Brain and Nervous System 1-5
When neurons communicate, an electrical impulse traveling down the axon causes neurotransmitters 
to be released from the end of the axon into the synapse. The neurotransmitters cross the synapse 
and bind to special molecules, called receptors, on the dendrite of the second neuron. Receptors are 
found on the dendrites and cell bodies of all neurons. The receptors convert the information into 
chemical or electrical signals which are then transmitted to the cell body and eventually to the axon.   
The axon then carries the signal to another neuron or to body tissues such as muscles.
Once a neurotransmitter binds to a receptor, a series of events follow. First, the message carried by the 
neurotransmitter is passed on to the receiving neuron. Second, the neurotransmitter is inactivated. 
It is either broken down by an enzyme or reabsorbed by the axon from which it was released. Other 
molecules, called transporter molecules, complete this reabsorption process. These molecules are 
located in the cell membranes of the axon that releases the neurotransmitters. They pick up speci fic 
neurotransmitters from the synapse and carry them back across the cell membrane and into the axon, 
where they are recycled for use at a later time. Note that this process is true for most neurotransmitters, 
but not for all of them.
The human body produces many di fferent types 
of neurotransmitters. Each neurotransmitter has 
a speci fic role to play in the functioning of the 
brain. A neurotransmitter binds to a receptor in 
much the same way that a key fits into a lock; a 
specific neurotransmitter will bind only to its 
corresponding receptor.
Neurotransmitter messages can be generalized as either excitatory or inhibitory messages. An  
excitatory neurotransmitter is one that increases the activity of neurons, and an inhibitory 
neurotransmitter decreases the activity of neurons. Over the course of these modules, several speci fic 
neurotransmitters will be discussed, including acetylcholine, GABA, and dopamine. 
Neurotransmitter Brain Function
Acetylcholine (excitatory)
Plays an important role in the function of the 
hippocampus, which is in charge of learning and 
memory.
GABA (inhibitory)
A neurotransmitter in the cerebral cortex, which 
controls thinking, perceiving, and understanding 
language.
Dopamine (excitatory)  Plays an important role in the pleasure/reward 
system in the brain. 
The process of neurotransmission as 
described here is shown step-by-step in 
Module 1 of the CD-ROM in Room 1—NT 101: 
An Introduction to Neurotransmission. 
Background

## Page 6

Module 11-6
Introduction
Time:
15−20 minutes
Supplies:
Transparencies of 
diagrams if needed
Handouts:
Module 1 magazine
Brain Parts Fact Sheet
Neurotransmission 
Fact Sheet
Reading:  Begin by giving students adequate time to read the student 
magazine. Have students pay particular attention to the following 
sections: Background, Stats and Facts, and Science in the Spotlight.
Discussion:  After students have read the magazine, facilitate a 
discussion about the brain using the following questions.  If necessary, 
review this information with your students, using the diagrams 
provided.
The Parts of the Brain  
• What does the brain do? 
• What are the four lobes of the brain?
• What are the functions of the right and left hemispheres?
• What does the limbic system control?
• What are three functions of the brain stem?
Neurotransmission 
• What are the three main parts of a neuron?
• Approximately how many neurons are in the brain?
• What are the steps of neurotransmission?
• What are the de finitions of neurotransmitters, synapse, and receptors? 
SummarySummaryPreparation

• Read the Background section of this module for more information about the brain and 
neurotransmission.
• P r o v i d e  s t u d e n t s  w i t h  t h e  M o d u l e  1  m a g a z i n e  The Brain and Nervous System for background 
knowledge. 
• Determine which activities you want the class to complete.
• Arrange for computer lab time or prepare the classroom computer for students’ Internet and  
CD-ROM use.
• Photocopy and pass out the Brain Parts Fact Sheet and the Neurotransmission Fact Sheet for 
students to complete during the lecture.
• Prepare transparencies and photocopies for the lesson.

## Page 7

An Introduction to the Brain and Nervous System 1-7
Time:
45 minutes
Supplies:
One large piece of 
butcher-block paper 
per group
Markers/crayons/
pencils
Handouts:
 
Neurotransmission 
Fact Sheet
                            Activity 1:  Brain Messages
              
  
This is the first activity in a series of six. These activities are all part of the Brain 
Power! Challenge  competition. Before you begin, go over the competition 
details that are found on page vii of this guide.  
Part 1:
1. Give each group the Neurotransmission Fact Sheet. Make sure students 
understand the role of the brain and neurons in transmitting messages 
throughout the body. 
2. Give each group a large sheet of butcher-block paper, pencils, and  
markers. Tell each group to draw the steps involved in neurotransmission. 
Students should be able to describe the parts of a neuron, how 
information exchange takes place, and how information is sent 
throughout the body. They should include a short written explanation 
of how the process works. 
Part 2:
3. Have groups take turns showing the steps of neurotransmission.  
Encourage students to ask questions in a discussion format in between 
the presentations.
4. Based on the clarity, information, and creativity in the groups’  
presentations, you will give each group a score from 0 −10. These scores 
need to be recorded on the Group Scorecard, as each Challenge  activity 
for the Brain Power!  modules involves a similar scoring system. At the 
end of all the modules, the team with the most points wins the Brain 
Power! Challenge  competition.
                  
Activities

## Page 8

Module 11-8
 Activity 2: Scavenger Hunt
In this activity, students will learn about neurotransmission by using the Internet. Have 
students work together in groups to complete an Internet scavenger hunt. 
  
Students should try to find the answers as quickly as possible. You can use the 
provided Scavenger Hunt handout or develop one of your own. The following Web 
site contains all the information students need to complete the scavenger hunt: 
 
 
          
The CD-ROM includes games and materials to supplement the information 
presented in the module. The room labeled “1” contains the following 
activities and speci fic information pertaining to this module:
• Learning Objectives:  these are presented at the beginning of each CD-ROM 
module
• Parts of the Brain:  a short film about brain parts
• Cerebral Cortex:  a short film about the cerebral cortex
• Hemisphere Quiz:  a personal quiz students can take to determine their own 
“dominant hemisphere”
• Harry Human Superguy:  an interactive quiz and cartoon about brain parts 
and functions
• NT 101: An Introduction to Neurotransmission:  this activity details the process 
of neurotransmission step-by-step
• Module Quiz : this quiz is the final part of the module, intended to assess 
students’ learning
CD-ROM
Ideas for making this activity more suitable for a bigger class: 
If there are not enough computers for all groups, send groups 
one at a time while the rest of the class completes other 
activities.  Use a timer to record each group’s completion time.
Prior to this activity, add the Internet resource listed below 
to the computer's Internet “Favorites” drop-down menu.
http://faculty .washington .edu/chudler/neurok .html
Time:
45 minutes
Supplies:
Timer if needed
Pen or pencil
Handouts:
Neurotransmission
Scavenger Hunt


Activities

## Page 9

An Introduction to the Brain and Nervous System 1-9
1.    Divide the students into pairs and give each a copy of  
      the Brain Parts Fact Sheet. Assign each pair a part of the brain 
and have them draw their own original cartoon character or superhero 
that represents this brain part. For example, students assigned the 
occipital lobe might draw a character with very large eyes, and students 
assigned the cerebellum might draw their character playing football or 
dancing ballet. After drawing the cartoon, each pair should think of 
a fun name for their character and then introduce him or her to the 
class.     
2.      Have students develop timelines charting the  
             major findings and breakthroughs in brain research. 
Divide the students into small groups and have each group focus on 
a speci fic timeframe (e.g., 0–1700 AD, 1700–1900, 1900–present). 
Encourage students to highlight key milestones on their timelines. The 
following Web site is a good starting point:
 http://faculty .washington .edu/chudler/hist .html
3.     Have students create a plan for a board  
    game to show the process of neurotrans -
mission. Make sure they cover all the major parts of the process. You can 
present the activity with the following framework to build motivation. 
 Have students create a visual presentation for their games. In this 
activity,  you are the president of a board game company looking  
to make and sell the best neurotransmission game. Judge the  
presentations based on creativity and scienti fic accuracy.
Extensions
The object of the game is for the neurotransmitter to reach the receptors 
across the synapse. What kind of obstacles would the neurotransmitter 
face in your game? What pieces would the neuron need to collect 
before it can send the message? What would the board look like?
Key to Icons
Art
Science 
History
Business
Social Studies
English
Math

## Page 10

Module 11-10
Resources
As students complete the activities in the module, observe whether they have mastered the following:
1. Do students know the main parts of the brain and the major functions of each part? 
2. Do students know the main parts of a neuron? Can they explain the function of the neurotrans -
mitters?
3. Can students explain neurotransmission? Do they have a clear understanding that this is the 
process through which messages are sent throughout the brain and body?
4. Do students understand the importance of the brain and its many functions?
5. Did students participate in the class activities and discussion? Did they engage in the topics?
RESOURCES FOR TEACHERS
National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA)
www.drugabuse .gov, 301-443-1124
This Web site contains information about drug abuse as well as sections designed speci fically for 
parents, teachers, and students.
National Clearinghouse for Alcohol and Drug Information (NCADI)
http://ncadi .samhsa.gov, 1-800-729-6686
NCADI is the world’s largest resource for information and materials concerning substance abuse. Many 
free publications are available here.
The Amazing Brain. Ornstein, R ., & Thompson, R . F. Boston: Houghton Mi fflin Company, 1991. This 
uniquely illustrated, comprehensive presentation of the numerous and complex functions of the brain 
is an ideal source for health educators and older students. 
Brain Basics: Know Your Brain
www.ninds.nih.gov/disorders/brain_basics/know_your_brain .htm
Provides an excellent overview of the architecture and functions of the brain.
RESOURCES FOR STUDENTS
Neuroscience for Kids
http://faculty .washington .edu/chudler/neurok .html 
Useful for both adults and children, this Web site contains information on the brain and neurotransmission, 
activities, experiments, pictures, and other resources.
Assessment

## Page 11

An Introduction to the Brain and Nervous System 1-11
Resources
The Physical Brain. Byrnie, F . Woodbridge, CT: Blackbirch Press, Inc., 2001. This book, part of  
The Amazing Brain  series, uses a variety of illustrations and pictures to describe the development, 
functions, and specializations of the brain. The book also contains an overview of neurotransmission. 
The Great Brain Book: An Inside Look at the Inside of Your Head. Newquist, H .P. New York: Scholastic 
Reference, 2005. The Great Brain Book  uses medical illustrations, cartoon illustrations, and interesting 
photographs to tell the complete story of the brain, from the history of the brain to the future of brain 
science.

